.\" $Id$
.TH mkzimage 8
.SH NAME
\fBmkzimage\fR - create bootimage
.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBmkzimage --vmlinux <ELF binary> --output <zImage>\fR [options]
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fBmkzimage\fR creates a bootimage which can be booted directly from firmware.
It can create images for PowerMac, IBM pSeries, IBM iSeries and PReP systems.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-\-vmlinux <ELF-binary>
filename of the vmlinux file to boot. This option is mandatory.
.TP
.B \-\-output <zImage>
filename of the output bootfile. This option is mandatory.
.TP
.B \-\-initrd <ramdisk>
filename of the initrd to use.
.TP
.B \-\-objdir <directory>
directory with the helper scripts and objects files to link. This is useful when building from source. Use \fBmkzimage --objdir `pwd`\fR to use the current directory as base.
.TP
.B \-\-cmdline 'kernel cmdline'
force "kernel cmdline" to be passed to the kernel. Options specified in the OpenFirmware \fBboot-file\fR property are ignored. It is possible to edit the cmdline during boot.
.TP
.B \-\-board <subarch>
build a bootimage suiteable for another PPC subarch.
Recognized options are:
.SP 1
.PD 0
.RS
.TP
.B chrp|rs6k
build an ELF image for CHRP, and add a NOTE section required for IBM RS/6000 and pSeries firmware. This NOTE section will break PowerMacs, do never boot such an image on a Mac!
.TP
.B iseries
append an initrd for IBM iSeries partitions. The normal vmlinux ELF binary will work out of the box. A kernel cmdline can not be appended, the --cmdline option is ignored.
.TP
.B pmac
build an ELF image for PowerMac. The size of the final image must be smaller than 4MB because the firmware can not load files larger than 4MB (4MB - 15kb actually).
.TP
.B pmaccoff
build an XCOFF image for old PowerMacs. They must be booted via network, loading them from disk will likely not work.
.TP
.B prep
build a boot image for PReP systems.
.RE
.PD
.TP
.B \-\-tmp <tempdir>
use \fBtempdir\fR as directory for temporary files during linking.
.SH AUTHOR
Olaf Hering <olh@suse.de>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR mkzimage_cmdline (8)
