.\" $Id$ \"
.\" vim: syntax=nroff
.TH lilo 8
.SH NAME
\fBlilo\fR \- configure the Linux Loader for PowerPC
.SH DESCRIPTION
.BR lilo (8)
will generate a bootloader configuration suitable for PowerPC board type it runs on.
It uses the configuration file \fB/etc/lilo.conf(5)\fR,
which has a syntax is similar to the i386 variant.

The requirements for the various board (or better: firmware) types supported by SuSE Linux
differ. Each one needs a different way to load the Linux kernel.
lilo currently knows about CHRP (Apple PowerMacs, IBM RS/6000 and pSeries systems), IBM legacy
iSeries and older Motorola/IBM PReP systems. CHRP based systems use the \fByaboot(5)\fR bootloader
to load the Linux kernel from a block device or via network. iSeries and PReP systems load
a single binary blob and execute it, they do not have a bootloader with a user interface.

.SH Booting on CHRP
CHRP based systems use Open Firmware to initialize the hardware and load an operating system.
Apple and IBM use slightly different implementations of the Open Firmware standard. IBM systems
run in real mode with MMU off, the ELF boot binary must have an ELF program header section \fBNOTE\fR.
Apple systems run in virtual mode, and unfortunately the ELF program header needed for IBM systems
makes the PowerMacs very very very unhappy.

Pegasos machines use also Open Firmware, but some implementation details differ from the IBM
and Apple behaviour. Thats why yaboot does currently not run properly. lilo does currently not
know about this board type.

On CHRP, yaboot is used as bootloader. lilo parses the config file and generates a suitable configuration
file \fByaboot.conf\fR. This file will be either written to the root filesystem of your Linux installation,
or it will be copied to a HFS or FAT partition where yaboot will find and load it. Optionally,
the Open Fimrware NVRAM variable \fBboot-device\fR will be configured properly to automatically load
yaboot from the correct hard disk.


.SH Booting on iSeries
IBM legacy iSeries are the pre-POWER4 systems with OS/400 as host operatin system.
Linux runs as a guest "application" on OS/400.
The kernel can be either loaded as a \fB*STMF\fR (stream file),
from a \fBkernel slot\fR or from a \fB0x41 PReP boot partition\fR on a virtual disk.
Use one or more \fIboot=\fR lines on \fB/etc/lilo.conf(5)\fR to specify the target.
It is not possible to modify the source of the kernel from the Linux side, all changes
must be made inside OS/400 (with the \fBwrkcfgsts *nws\fR command). The only exception
is is booting from a slot. A kernel which is written to and activated in a special /proc/iSeries/
file will remain active as long as the partition is in VARY ON state.

Use \fIboot=B\fR to specify \fB/proc/iSeries/mf/B/vmlinux\fR as source for the Linux kernel.
lilo will write the image specified in default= to this file and activate it with \fB/proc/iSeries/mf/side\fR.
After a reboot in Linux, the kernel will be active. Once the partition is shutdown and in VARY OFF
state, the location specified as IPL source will be used to load the kernel after a VARY ON command.
Possible values for slot names are \fBA\fR and \fBB\fR.

Use \fIboot=/dev/iseries/vda\fR to specify a virtual disk with an 0x41 PReP boot partition. OS/400 will look for
the first disk partition of that type and load its content if the IPL source is \fB*NWSTG\fR.

Use \fIboot=/some/filename\fR to generate an IPL streamfile. This file must be transfered manually
to the OS/400 side. Its absolute path name on the OS/400 side must be entered if the IPL source
is \fB*STMF\fR.

Linux kernel command line options must be provided via OS/400 if the IPL source is *STMF or *NWSTG.
If the IPL source is a kernel slot, then the command line can be updated only via \fB/proc/iSeries/mf/B/cmdline\fR.

.SH Booting on PReP
Older PReP systems can only boot one binary file from harddisk, CD or via network. They do not provide
callbacks into firmware to implement some kind of bootloader. lilo will generated a usable zImage
and place it in a 0x41 PReP boot partition on a disk specified in the \fIboot=\fR option in \fB/etc/lilo.conf(5)\fR.
The zImage will also contain a preconfigured kernel commandline with the contents specified in the \fIappend=\fR
option. This commandline can be editied during boot.

Note: Due to some kernel changes, PReP systems do currently not boot with kernels 2.6.15 and later. You have
to build your own custom kernel with ARCH=ppc. Support for PReP will be reenabled later.

.SH AUTHORS
.B lilo
was written by Olaf Hering <olh@suse.de>. It is now maintained and improved further by Joachim Plack <jplack@suse.de>
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Bugs in \fBlilo\fR should be reported to <olaf@suse.de>
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR lilo.conf (5),
.BR mkzimage (8),
.BR mkzimage_cmdline (8),
.BR bootstrap (8),
.BR yaboot (8),
.BR yaboot.conf (5)
