.\" $Id$ \"
.\" vim: syntax=nroff
.TH lilo.conf 5
.SH NAME
\fBlilo.conf\fR \- lilo((8) configuration file
.SH DESCRIPTION
\fB/etc/lilo.conf\fR is used by
.BR lilo (8)
to generate a bootloader configuration suitable for PowerPC board type it runs on.

The syntax is similar to the i386 variant. There are global options and options per boot image.
Unknown options will cause lilo to abort.

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B boot=
specifies the Linux device node where the bootinfo should be stored.
lilo will use sysfs to determine the real hardware and its OpenFirmware device path behind this device node.
On iSeries systems, boot= can also describe a kernel slot name and a filename for \fB*STMF\fR.
The kernel slot name can be either A, B or C.
.TP
.B activate
this option will tell lilo to update the OpenFirmware \fBboot-device\fR variable with the full OpenFirmware path pointing to the device specified in \fBboot=\fR. If this option is missing, the system may not boot.
.TP
.B clone
does something wich is not yet documented in this man page
.TP
.B force_fat
does something wich is not yet documented in this man page
.TP
.B force
does something wich is not yet documented in this man page
.TP
.B progressbar
does something wich is not yet documented in this man page
.TP
.B bootfolder=
specifies the name of the directory where boot related files like yaboot are stored on the Apple HFS partition. The default is \fBsuseboot\fR.
.TP
.B timeout=
specifies to time to wait before booting the default image. The value must be in milliseconds, 100 means 10 seconds. If this option is missing, yaboot will wait forever.
.TP
.B default=
specifies the default label. If this option is missing, the first specified image= will be used as default.
.TP
.B image=
specifies a kernel filename to boot and starts a new section.
.TP
.B other=
specfies a Linux device node of a partition with a MacOS installation.
The label= name should be \fBmacos\fR.  If the name is \fBmacosx\fR, a file named \\System\\Library\\CoreServices\\BootX will be booted, instead of \\\\:tbxi. Use \fBmacosx\fR only if your MacOS X boot folder was "deblessed".
.SH OPTIONS FOR GLOBAL AND IMAGE SECTIONS
.TP
.B root=
specifies the kernels \fBroot=\fR option. This is passed to the kernel cmdline as is. It can be either a Linux device node name, \fBUUID=uuid-string\fR or \fBLABEL=filesystem-label\fR.
This option is depreciated, kernel parameters should be passed via the \fBappend=\fR option.
.TP
.B append=
specifies kernel command line options. They are passed as is to the kernel.
.SH OPTIONS FOR IMAGE SECTIONS
.TP
.B label=
gives the image section a name. This name can be used in yaboot and in the default= option to refer to a kernel image.
.TP
.B initrd=
specifies the initrd filename to be used.
.TP
.B sysmap=
specifies a System.map file, useful for the xmon kernel debugger. yaboot ignores this option because xmon uses kallsyms since kernel 2.6.13.
.TP
.B copy
forces the kernel and initrd to be copied to the HFS partition. This is required when the kernel and initrd resides on a filesystem not readable by yaboot.
.TP
