.\" Copyright (c) 2001 Ethan Benson <erbenson@alaska.net>
.\" Portions of this manual page from silo.conf documentation
.\" Copyright (c) 1999 Jakub Jelinek <jakub@redhat.com>
.\" Portions of this manual page from lilo.conf documentation
.\" Copyright (c) 1992-1998 Werner Almesberger
.\" This program is distributed according to the Gnu General Public License.
.\" See the file COPYING in the yaboot source distribution.
.\"
.TH YABOOT.CONF 5 "28 October 2006" "Linux PowerPC" "File Formats"
.SH NAME
.B yaboot.conf
\- Configuration file format used by
.BR yaboot (8)
.SH SYNOPSIS
.BI "/etc/yaboot.conf"
.SH DESCRIPTION
The \fByaboot.conf\fP file is a configuration file for \fByaboot\fP
which is read during booting.

\fByaboot.conf\fP provides instructions for \fByaboot\fP. This
includes which kernels to load and what options to pass to them.
\fByaboot\fP reads and parses its configuration file found on the
\fBbootstrap\fR(8) partition on PowerMacs, and directly from the root
filesystem on IBM PowerPC hardware.

\fByaboot\fP is able to boot kernels even without this configuration file or
if this file is crippled or contains syntax errors, but the user has to
enter full OpenFirmware names and full path of the images to load and all options
required for them manually.
.SH "FILE FORMAT"
The file consists of comments and variable assignments.
.TP
Comments
Start with a \fI#\fP character, and continue to
the end of the line.
.TP
Flag variables
Consist of a single keyword and are followed by whitespace
or the end of the file.
.TP
String variables
Consist of the variable name, optional whitespace, a
\fI=\fP character, optional whitespace, the value and required
newline. 
.TP
File names
Some string variables are expecting file names. A file name format in \fByaboot\fP
is:

  [<devicename>]:[<part>],<absolute_pathname>

Optional <devicename> is the OpenFirmware name of the device the file
is located on. See below for its syntax. For OpenFirmware the device
name must be immediately followed by the \fI:\fP character. The default is
the boot device yaboot was booted from, or the value of \fIdevice=\fR
in \fB/etc/yaboot.conf\fR.

Optional <part> is the 1 based partition number on the device. First
partition is 1 (e.g. on \fI/dev/sda\fP in Linux is this \fI/dev/sda1\fP).
The default is the default partition (the value of the \fIpartition\fP
variable in the config file).  Note that on Apple partition tables the
first partition is always the partition table itself (/dev/sda1 is the
partition table).

<absolute_pathname> must start with a \fI/\fP character and is the
pathname from the root of the filesystem on that device (unless it is the
root filesystem this is different to the pathname you will see in GNU/Linux).

.TP
Device name syntax is:

  <fully_qualified_prom_device_name>[\fB:\fP<part_number>]

where the fully qualified OpenFirmware device name starts with a
\fI/\fP character for the root of the OpenFirmware device tree and
contains all the nodes from the root in the tree up to the disk device
node. If some node contains more than one child node with the same
name and the path has to go through such node, a \fI@\fP character
followed by hexadecimal address pair is desirable to resolve the
ambiguity. Optional partition number is a number that follows the
\fI:\fP character \fI1\fP (for first partition) \fI2\fP (for second,
partition, etc). OpenFirmware device names might look like:

  /pci@80000000/pci-bridge@d/ADPT,2930CU@2/@0:
  /pci/@d/mac-io/ata-3@20000/disk@1:
  /pci/@d/pci-ata@1/ata-4@0/disk@0:
  /pci/@d/pci-ata@1/ata-4@0/disk@1:

OpenFirmware device names if specified as part of the file name (see above)
should be followed by the \fI:\fP character to separate the device name from
the optional Linux partition number, as shown above.  For more information on
this topic, consult
.BR bootstrap (8).

OpenFirmware also has some predefined aliases which are used instead
of the longer canonical device names.  Standard aliases include:

   hd: - The primary master IDE hard disk.
   ultra1: - The primary slave IDE hard disk.
   cd: - The secondary master device (usually CDROM).
   zip: - The secondary slave device (usually zip drive).
.PP
Variable names are case sensitive, values of string variables are also
case sensitive.

Blanks and equal signs may only be part of a variable name or a value if
they are escaped by a backslash or if the value is embedded in double
quotes. An equal sign may not be the only character in a name or value.

An escaped tab is converted to an escaped blank. An escaped newline is
removed from the input stream. An escaped backslash (i.e. two
backslashes) is converted to a backslash. Inside quoted strings, only
double quotes, backslashes and newlines can be escaped.

Example:

  # Simple yaboot.conf
  boot=/dev/hda2
  device=hd:
  partition=3
  timeout=50
  root=/dev/hda3
  read-only
  # End of global variables - begin image labels
  image=/boot/vmlinux
    label=linux
  image=/boot/vmlinux.old
    label=old

.SH "GLOBAL OPTIONS"
\fB/etc/yaboot.conf\fP begins with a possibly empty global options section.
This section contains all variable assignments up to the first \fIimage\fP
setting.

The following global options are recognized:
.TP
.TP
.BI "default=" name
Uses the specified image as the default boot image.
.TP
.BI "message=" message_filename
Specifies a file containing a message that is displayed before the
boot prompt.  You may specify either a plain pathname, in which case
the default device and partition will be derived from the
\fIdevice=\fR and \fIpartition=\fR lines in the global section of
\fByaboot.conf\fR, or you can specify a full OpenFirmware device path,
the file may be on any \fByaboot\fR(8) supported filesystem.  The message
file must be plain ASCII text with UNIX newlines.  Note: only the
first 2000 bytes of this file will be read.
.TP
.BI "password=" password
Protect booting by a password. The password is given in either
cleartext or an md5 hash (of the same format as used in GNU/Linux
passwd files)in the configuration file.  Because of that, the
configuration file should be only readable by the superuser and the
password should differ if possible from other passwords on the system.
See
.BR chmod (1)
to set permissions on
.BR yaboot.conf (5).
.TP
.BI "timeout=" tsecs
Sets a timeout (in tenths of a second) for keyboard input. If no key is
pressed for the specified time, either the image specified as \fIdefault=\fR
or the first listed image is automatically booted.
.TP
.BI "init-code=" string
Specifies that \fByaboot\fR(8) should call OpenFirmware to
execute the string given (a series of forth commands) before printing
the boot prompt.
.TP
.BI "fgcolor=" string
Specifies the foreground (text) color used by \fByaboot\fR(8) and the
multiboot menu.  Available colors are: black, blue, light-blue, green,
light-green, cyan, light-cyan, red, light-red, purple, light-purple,
brown, light-gray, dark-gray, yellow, and white.  The default is white.
.TP
.BI "bgcolor=" string
Specifies the background color used by \fByaboot\fR(8) and the
mulitboot menu.  Available colors are: black, blue, light-blue, green,
light-green, cyan, light-cyan, red, light-red, purple, light-purple,
brown, light-gray, dark-gray, yellow, and white.  The default is
black.
.PP
In addition to these global options, per-image options \fIappend\fP,
\fIdevice\fP, \fIimage\fP, \fIinitrd-size\fP,
\fIinitrd\fP, \fIpartition\fP,
\fIramdisk\fP, \fIread-only\fP, \fIread-write\fP, \fIroot\fP and
\fIrestricted\fR can be specified in the global section. They are used
as defaults if they aren't specified in the configuration sections of
the respective kernel images and will be used also for the arbitrary
images specified on the input line and not mentioned in the
configuration file (unless overridden by input line options).
.SH "PER-IMAGE SECTIONS"
A per-image section starts with a line

  \fBimage=\fP\fIfilename\fP

An image= section which should be looked at only when yaboot runs on a
32bit or 64bit cpu can be specified with this syntax:

  \fBimage[32bit]=\fP\flfilename\fP

  \fBimage[64bit]=\fP\flfilename\fP

From the \fIimage\fP line on until next \fIimage\fP line are variable
assignments and flags for this image's section. The following options
and flags are recognized:
.TP
.BI "label=" name
The bootloader uses the main file name (without its path) of each image
specification to identify that image. A different name can be used by
setting the variable `label'.
.TP
.BI "alias=" name
A second name for the same entry can be used by specifying an alias.
.TP
.BI "partition=" part_no
Specifies the default partition number (a digit, hda1 is part_no 1) to
be used if some filename does not specify a partition number
explicitly.  The kernel images should be located on the root
filesystem, thus \fIpartition\fR should usually be set to the root
partition number.  For example if the root partition is /dev/hda3 (the
third partition), then \fIpartition\fR should be set to
\fIpartition=3\fR.
.TP
.BI "device=" device_name
Specifies the default device name to be used if some filename does not
specify a device name explicitly. This defaults to the device
\fByaboot\fP has been booted from if you don't specify \fIdevice\fP in either
the global section or per-image section of the config file.
.TP
.BI "append=" string
Appends the options specified to the parameter line
passed to the kernel. This is typically used to
specify parameters of hardware that can't be
entirely auto-detected or for which probing may be
dangerous. Example:

  append = "video=ofonly"
.TP
.BI "literal=" string
Like `append', but removes all other options (e.g. setting of the root
device). Because vital options can be removed unintentionally with
`literal', this option cannot be set in the global options section.
.TP
.BI "ramdisk=" size
This specifies the size of the optional RAM disk. A value of zero indicates
that no RAM disk should be created. If this variable is omitted, the RAM
disk size configured into the boot image is used.
.TP
.BI "read-only"
This specifies that the root file system should be mounted read-only.
Typically, the system startup procedure re-mounts the root file system
read-write later (e.g. after fsck'ing it).
.TP
.BI "read-write"
This specifies that the root file system should be mounted read-write.
.TP
.BI "root=" root-device
This specifies the device that should be mounted as root.
.TP
.BI "initrd=" filename
Specifies the file that will be loaded at boot time as the initial RAM disk.
Example:

  initrd=/images/initrd.img

yaboot will not decompress the initial ramdisk, the Linux kernel will do that.
.TP
.BI "initrd-size=" size
When more than one initial ramdisk part is specified in the \fIinitrd\fP
setting, this option is required to be the sum of sizes of all the images
mentioned on that line, in bytes. It is required so that yaboot can reserve
space for the image, even though size of some parts has not been determined
yet.
.TP
.BI "single-key"
Enables booting the image by hitting a single key when the cursor is at the
first character in the input line, without the need to press <ENTER>
afterwards. \fIsingle-key\fP requires that either the image's label or its
alias (or both) is a single character. If you need to specify parameters for
such an image, or if you want to boot some other image which happens to
start with the same letter, then you need to start the input line with at
least one space which will be removed before processing but will disable
this single-key feature.
.TP
.BI "restricted"
Restricted limits the ability to customize command line arguments.
\fIrestricted\fR has no effect if \fIpassword=\fR is not specified.
A password is only required to boot the image specified in
\fB/etc/yaboot.conf\fP if parameters are specified on the command line
or if the user enters an image that is not specified in the configuration
file at all (arbitrary file load).  For an image not including
the \fIrestricted\fR keyword (unless \fIrestricted\fR is in the global
section), the password will be required.  If \fIrestricted\fR
is in the global section, all boot labels act as above (duh:).
.SH EXAMPLES
Here is an example \fIyaboot.conf\fR file:
.IP
.nf
device=hd:
root=/dev/hda3
partition=3
timeout=20
fgcolor=black
bgcolor=green
default=Linux
password=secret

image=/boot/vmlinux
	label=Linux
	read-only
	restricted

image=/boot/vmlinux.old
	label=linux.old
	read-only

.fi
.SH AUTHORS
This man page was derived from \fBsilo.conf\fR(5) written by Jakub
Jelinek and the SparcLinux team, and modified for
\fByaboot\fR(8) by Ethan Benson.
.P
\fByaboot\fR(8) was written by Benjamin Herrenschmidt <benh@kernel.crashing.org>.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR bootstrap (8),
.BR chmod (1),
.BR hfsutils (1),
.BR mount (8),
.BR nvsetenv (8),
.BR show_of_path.sh (8),
.BR yaboot (8),
.BR lilo (8).
